>>Everyone's fond of
saying that coastlines,
and some forest distributions,
and all this stuff are fractal.
Well, doesn't this imply that
there is then a global fractal?
There is a fractal
dimension, which,
when you feed it
into your computer,
and wrap the data
around a sphere,
the continents and oceans
of Earth should appear.
And in principle, again
to the absurd level,
you should be able
to then telescope
in on that portion
of this data that
is wrapped around the sphere
that corresponds to the North
California, and on
your computer screen
should appear Esalen hung
on the cliffs of Big Sur,
with us sitting in a room
inside, discussing the matter.
>>Rupert, Terence, I'm Ralph.
Creation, imagination--
my mask is chaos.
>>In my early LSD
experiences, I seemed
to see motifs and
structures that
gave me an interest
in Tibetan Buddhism.
And I went to India with the
intent of studying the Tibetan
language, and quickly found
that the whole thing was
just overwhelming,
and that I was just
a human atom in
the sea of India,
and that the notion of
encompassing or understanding
what this was, was clearly
the task of a lifetime.
And several times in my
life, I have acted out
this sort of
ricocheting relationship
between the humanities and
the sciences, at times,
losing myself in the study
of certain schools of poetry,
or literature, or painting,
and then, at other times,
spending years reading
the philosophy of science,
and epistemic basis of physics,
and this sort of thing,
always trying to get a
resolution on the content
of my experience, my lived
experience, which included
the psychedelic experience,
which for me, from very
early on, was this tremendous
mystery or conundrum, which
was set down in the
middle of my being.
And it still
continues like that.
I keep returning to that,
testing all the ideas
against the fullness
of experience.
The main difference between
our world and the world
that science tells
us we're living in
is that science denies the
quirky, freaky, cosmic giggle,
high plottedness,
completely improbable,
totally quirky humor that
binds everything together,
and that makes it
something other
than an engine in which
atoms blindly run,
in Whitehead's phrase.
Schrodinger
brilliantly anticipated
the discovery of DNA, and then
Joseph Needham and LL White.
And Erich Jantsch should
be mentioned, actually,
as a precursor of
us all, I think.
I mean, Erich Jantsch was a
great pioneer, a great soul.
And he saw very deeply
into whole systems,
as did Ilya Prigogine, the
Belgian thermodynamicist.
And I think a lot of all of what
we're doing comes out of that.
What Prigogine showed
that just brought down
the house was that there
could be perturbations
of physical systems
that were unpredictable,
and that would cause the
whole system to actually move
to a more ordered state
than the initial state.
And this perturbation to
higher states of order
looks suspiciously
like a violation
of the supposedly inviolate
Second Law of Thermodynamics.
So that looks like a doorway
into an energetic hyperspace.
>>Well, when "A New
Science of Life"
came out in 1982 in
America-- it came out
a year earlier in England-- I
came to California, because it
was published in Los Angeles.
I found myself here at Esalen.
I found an extraordinary new
range of things going on I
hadn't known about.
And when I was in San Francisco,
a friend who I knew from Europe
said to me just the day
before I left "there's
somebody you must meet.
He's called Terence McKenna."
I didn't know much
about Terence.
So I went up there, and,
in this large 1956 Buick,
we headed off into the
woods in Sonoma County,
where Terence lives.
And there I met both
Terence and Ralph,
who was there for the day.
I found that part of my
interest in these other realms
of reality, of course, like
many people in this room,
was stimulated by experience
with psychedelic substances.
This was before I went to India.
When I arrived in India,
I found that India
is a kind of psychedelic
realm, anyway.
It's just an amazing place.
So in Terence, I
found somebody who
knew about that whole
realm, who shared
with me an interest in
India, since it played
an important part
in his development,
and who have views about
the nature of reality, which
complemented my own in
an extraordinary way.
My own theory is about
memory, and habit in nature.
Terence, I found, had
developed a theory
about novelty and
creativity in nature,
a theory about the quality of
time and the creation process
as it is related to the
ongoing flux of events.
And Ralph had a kind of
mathematical theory, which
was just the kind of thing
that the view of nature
I was trying to develop needed--
the idea of nature being drawn
by goals, or attractors in
the mathematical science
of dynamics.
This is a model of the reality
being pulled from ahead
by things called attractors.
It's a teleological,
animistic view
of nature dressed up in the
guise of mathematical models,
which I found most fascinating.
And so, for me, the meeting
with Ralph and Terence
was a step further
towards seeing
how one could begin to dream
of a world in which nature was
seen as alive, in which
the imagination permeated
all reality, in which animals
and plants are seen as part
of the living texture, the
living components, the cells,
and the life of Gaia, and
Gaia in the life of the cosmos
as a whole, in fact, a view
of the world as alive, which
recalls, in some respects,
the old cosmologies
of the ancient world, where
the cosmos was seen as a living
organism, where they
thought of the whole cosmos
as having a soul, the
soul of the world--
the Anima Mundi.
So I was brought up
in the field of music,
but I was attracted
to mathematics early.
And when I was 14, I played
in the state symphony.
After that, I started
in mathematics,
and I became a professor
at Berkeley, when I was 23.
I had an easy way
in mathematics.
And way the system
works, the carpet
is unrolled in front of you.
You have a few choices, but
basically, before you even
know what's happening,
the carpet is unrolled,
and you're down the runnel
into whatever you can
do that's useful to the system.
In this process, I lost nature.
But there was a great gain,
because I love it out there.
I love to be off the planet.
I always did, and to this
day, I spend very little time
on planet Earth.
So it went on in this way.
And by 1967, I was a
professor at Princeton.
I had written three
books on mathematics
that you need a
microscope to read.
And I had been studying,
for a long while, chaos.
But we didn't call
it "chaos" then,
and we didn't see in it any
role in the natural world,
or in social transformation,
or in the evolution
of consciousness.
Because we didn't think
about anything out there.
So one day, after my third book
was done, and I was exhausted,
and I looked up,
and all the students
were out in the courtyard,
demonstrating about the Vietnam
War, and to open the university
to women students, and so on.
I said what exactly is going on?
Here, they said, take this.
And so like many
people in that year,
or around that time in 1967,
my career had a bifurcation.
So I went off the track
with psychedelics,
with meditation, but
especially with searching,
with trying everything.
And eventually, I was living
in a cave in the Himalayas.
And when I returned
to California,
I was standing on
a street corner
in Santa Cruz in white pajamas.
And a car stopped, and an old
friend from a previous lifetime
said "there's somebody
you have to meet.
Get in the car."
I had nothing to do.
It sounded OK.
And in that time, I believed
that everything goes perfectly.
You just go along with
the flow, as they said.
I didn't know it would
be a two hour drive.
So I got in the car.
There was the two hour
drive to Berkeley.
And I was literally
dumped out of the car
on Terence's front step.
I had never heard of
Terence at the time-- 1972.
And I went in, and
what happened then-- I
would still say
that although we've
had many wonderful talks,
and exciting, thrilling,
and nutritious times in
the meanwhile, that that
was quite a miraculous chat.
Many subjects came up-- how to
grow mushrooms, outer space.
I don't know.
Anything you could think of
all passed by in the course
of an hour or two.
In this way, we became
friends, and this habit we had,
this activity that
we do-- I mean,
we never go for a hike
or something like that.
We sit in the evening, and talk.
About what happens is
synergistic, miraculous
growth-- evolutionary.
And in this
revitalization of my work,
and eventually the whole
field of mathematics,
my conversations with
Terence-- whereas I
think we thought of them
as just good fun-- did
have a really fundamental
influence on everything
I've done since.
So fun-- I would say
"fun" is insulting.
I mean "thrilling," because
of going to the edge,
going beyond the edge,
having company there,
finding things which
you can bring back,
and they work, and become part
of everything you're doing.
So it's opened up
these phenomena
characterized by chaotic,
irregular, that is to say,
not well ordered in
the previous paradigm
of space-time structure.
For example, relationships among
people, the states and change
of states of society, the
whole process of history,
the intuitive experience,
subjective experience
of relationships and
so on-- all of this,
what we always wanted to come
onto the view of a better
understanding.
Suddenly, it's possible.
But although it's
possible, it's not done.
But we can do it.
We can try to do it.
>>The flutter of the moth's
wing can trigger the hurricane.
This is not a poetic statement.
This is the fact of the matter
within this kind of description
of nature.
In other words,
very small changes
create cascades where whole
states shift and are perturbed.
And this is the
kind of situation
that we are facing as a society
and a planetary species.
We have the resources.
We have the knowledge.
But what we seem
to lack is the will
to implement these things,
to actually step back
from the abyss.
So it has to come
through a change of mind.
And this new mathematical
stuff is telling us
that the intimations
of mysticism,
the intimation of a
possibility of transcendence
is all firmly grounded.
It's almost as
though mathematics
is the extreme cutting edge
of human understanding.
How can we quickly export
these new understandings
that release us from a need
for closure, that free us
from an either/or universe?
How can we quickly
export these models
from the realm of
research mathematics
into the realm of daily life?
I really see it
as politics almost
at the viral level,
that we are trying
to create new languages,
and new concepts,
and not only create them,
but teach them to you.
And we ourselves repeat
them, over and over again,
and you feed back into this.
And then we refine the meme.
And then a meme is like a gene.
It can be replicated.
And we have not seen
language as the playing
field of the creation
of the new paradigm,
but that's really where it is.
We can transform
ourselves no more quickly
than we transform our language.
And the way we
transform our language
is by really pushing
on the envelope
of the act of communication.
You know, the caterpillar
in Alice in Wonderland
says say what you mean,
and mean what you say.
I do.
>>I'm a biologist by background.
I studied biology, because
I was interested in animals
and plants.
And when I was studying
it at Cambridge,
I began to have terrible
doubts about what
I was doing, because everything
that really interested me
about animals and
plants somehow vanished,
when I got into the
biochemistry laboratories.
I was majoring in
biochemistry, and I did
a Ph.D. In biochemistry there.
But there's a curious
thing about biochemistry.
You're doing
biochemistry, to study
the molecular basis of life.
Yet the very first thing
you do in the laboratory
is kill whatever
you're studying.
Grind it up, extract
the enzymes, and then,
in a test tube,
study the properties
of some of these
molecules extracted
from this killed organism.
And it began to occur to me that
perhaps this wasn't the best
way to understand life.
But I didn't quite know want to
do about it, because everybody
else thought it definitely was
the best way to study life,
and in fact, there was
no other valid way.
So this set me thinking.
And I began to see that
the science of biology
could be reformed, that this
idea that living organisms
are truly life, rather
than being just machines,
whereas the official doctrine
in mechanistic theory
says living organisms are
just complicated machines.
Believe it or not, it's
still the official doctrine
of academic biology
and academic medicine.
These ideas went on developing.
I then saw how I could
bring them all together
in a synthesis, and
into a new way of seeing
how biology could be done.
And I wrote a book
while still in India
called "A New Science
of Life." in it,
the basic idea I'm
suggesting is that there's
a kind of inherent memory in
all kinds of animals and plants.
Each species has its
own collective memory.
So each member of
the species draws
on this collective memory,
and in turn contributes to it.
The instincts of
animals, for example,
the behavioral of cuckoos, the
spinning of webs by spiders,
are like a memory, a
habit, of the species.
This inheritance takes
place by the process
I call "morphic
resonance," by a kind
of invisible, intangible
memory, a kind of resonance
between present and past
organisms of the same kind.
The same theory helps
explain how our own memory
works by a resonance
between our own past
and our present states.
It leads to the idea that
our memories aren't stored
in our brains, but
that we're tuning
into them by this process
of morphic resonance.
>>Rupert's notions
revision causality.
That means induct you
into an entirely new way
in which things happen.
And this is after
all where we're all
spending a lot of our time.
The models that
Ralph is working with
show that the world is
not an engine running down
toward a heat death, but
a tremendous kaleidoscope
of unpredictable, creative, open
ended activity on every level.
I mean, it's really a
dazzlingly kaleidoscopic vision.
It's like a Sufi
hierophany or something.
But we're seeing it on
the screens of computer
simulations, of this
mathematical domain that
is also the neural
domain, that is also
the social domain, that is
also the echo-planetary domain.
This is not error.
This is not mysticism.
This is the real
facts of how it is,
how the world fits together.
It fits together through the
infusion of its invisible soul.
>>If nature is evolutionary,
if all of nature is evolving,
what about the eternal
laws of nature,
which scientists have taken for
granted for so many centuries?
Concepts going right
back to Pythagoras
and the ancient Greeks?
Were all the laws of nature
there before the Big Bang?
Well,
If they were there
before the Big Bang,
where could they possibly be?
There was nowhere to be.
There was no universe.
So if the laws of nature were
all there before the Big Bang,
then they must be non-physical,
idea-like entities dwelling
in some kind of permanent,
mathematical mind,
be that thought of
as the mind of God,
or just the mind of a
disembodied mathematician.
They were thought
to be permanent,
and all there
before the universe.
This assumption is
still held by most
of our modern cosmologists.
It's something that
physicists have not yet
begun to question seriously.
But as you can see,
it's like an idea
that's had the carpet
taken from under it.
It's hanging over an
abyss, because there's
no reason why we should
assume the laws of nature
are permanent in an
evolving universe.
If the universe is evolving,
then the laws of nature
could be evolving as well.
And in fact, the very
idea of the laws of nature
may not be appropriate.
It may be better to think of
the habits of nature evolving.
The Big Bang is like the
cracking of the cosmic egg.
That's its
mythological correlate,
the notion of the ancient
mythological idea of the cosmos
beginning through the hatching
or the cracking of an egg.
Followed by the growth of
the organism that comes out,
it's an embryological metaphor.
And we now have a developmental
model of the whole universe.
It's like a developing organism.
It's not like a
machine at all anymore.
The universe is a growing,
developing organism,
which is differentiating within
itself, forming new forms,
and patterns-- an evolutionary
process that, on Earth, has
given rise to all the forms
of animal and plant life,
all the different
kinds of microbes
to ourselves, and to the
many and varied forms
of human culture.
A theory of evolutionary
habits demands a theory
of evolutionary creativity.
How can we understand
the creativity
that's given rise to new ideas,
to Beethoven's symphonies,
to theories in science,
to new works of art,
to new forms of culture, to
instincts in birds and animals,
to the forms of flowers,
and plants, and leaves,
to the many kinds of
rocks and crystals,
and to all the forms of
galactic, and stellar,
and planetary organization?
What kind of creativity could
underlie all those processes?
One is the materialist
view that says
the whole thing is entirely
due to blind chance,
that there's nothing
but a darkness
of blind, material
processes going on.
And then by blind chance
new things happen.
The other model for
understanding creativity,
I think, is provided
by our imaginations.
Our imaginations are not full
of fixed, platonic ideas,
which are always the
same, like platonic minds.
They're ongoing, changing,
dynamical processes
with a kind of creative richness
that always surprises us.
So the question is, if nature
is alive rather than dead,
if the universe,
if the Earth, have
a mind or soul of their
own, if living organisms are
in some sense
mind-like, or if there's
a mind-like process
of work in nature,
then how does this
express its creativity?
And so then the question is,
could this creativity in nature
be a product of the imagination
of Gaia, of the Gaian mind?
Could it be a product of
the cosmic imagination?
Could that be a
kind of imagination
working in nature,
which is similar
to our own imaginations?
Could our imaginations be
just one conscious aspect
of an imagination working
through the whole natural
world, perhaps
unconsciously as it
works underneath the surface of
our dreams, perhaps sometimes
consciously?
And could this
ongoing imagination
be the basis of evolutionary
creativity in nature,
just as it is in
the human realm?
>>Set her on down.
>>Hello, Houston.
Sweet 16 has arrived.
>>How would it be-- or is
it credible that perhaps
that the universe is a kind
of system in which more
advanced forms of order actually
influence previous states
of organization?
This is what is emerging
in Ralph Abraham's work
with the chaotic attractors.
They are attractors.
That means but they
exert influence
on less organized
states, and pull them
toward some kind of end state.
And for me, the key to unlocking
what is going on with history,
creativity, progressive
process of all sorts,
is to place the state of
completion at the end,
but to see it as a kind of
higher dimensional object,
which casts an enormous
and flickering shadow
over the lower dimensions
of organization
of which this universe is one.
So that, for instance,
in the human domain,
when we look at
history, what we see
is an endless series
of anticipations.
The golden age is coming.
The Messiah is immediately
around the corner.
Great change is
soon to be upon us.
These are intimations of change.
It's almost as though the
transcendental object that
is the great attractor
in many, many dimensions
throws out images of
itself, which filter down
through these lower
dimensional matrices,
and actually are the basis
of the appetition of nature
for greater expression
of form, the appetition
of the human soul for
greater immersion in beauty,
the appetition of human
history for greater
expression of complexity.
So when I think about these
terms-- chaos, creativity,
imagination-- I see
them as a three stroke
engine of some sort.
Each impels and runs the other,
and sets up a reinforcing cycle
that then stabilizes
organisms, processes,
that are caught up in this
in the phenomenon of being.
The phenomenon of being is
this self-synergizing engine
out of chaos,
through creativity,
into the imagination,
back into chaos, out
into creativity, and
so forth, and so on.
And it operates on many
levels simultaneously,
so that the planet is
undergoing a destiny.
Deep time, the time of geology,
was only really discovered
around the turn of the century.
And it is cosmically ennobling
to think of the universe
as a thing of great age.
But I think that it's
time to put in place, next
to the notion of deep
cosmic time, the notion
of chaotic, sudden change, cusp
flux, and sudden perturbation.
Because what deep
time has revealed,
as we've pushed our
understanding of the career
of organic life back
65 million years,
270 million years, what we
see is tremendous punctuation
built into the universe.
In the case of the Earth in
the form of asteroidal impacts,
this thing which happened
65 million years ago,
nothing larger than a
chicken walked away from it
on this planet.
So there's a strange
paradox, where
taking deep time seriously,
the message of deep time is you
may not have as much
time as you thought,
that the universe is
dynamic, capable of turning
sudden corners.
So then the imagination
becomes a beacon.
The imagination is, as it
were, a scout sent ahead,
or something which has preceded
us into history, and in fact,
is a kind of
eschatological object.
It is shedding influence,
the morpho-genetic field,
if you wish.
If the morpho-genetic
field is not
subject to the inverse square
law of decreased influence
over distance, then I, as
a layman, don't see why,
Rupert, we couldn't locate it
at the conclusion of process.
Because one of the things that's
always puzzled me about the Big
Bang is it's a singularity.
This is the term
physicists use for it.
This means theory
cannot predict it,
and yet it is necessary to make
everything which follows from
it happen.
So you just say there's
no reason for this.
We have no argument for this,
but the rest of the theory
needs it.
So it's a singularity, and
the immense improbability,
which modern science rests
on, but cares not to discuss,
is this-- the belief that the
universe sprang from nothing
in a single moment.
Well, if you can make that
leap, to believe that,
it's very hard to see
what you couldn't believe.
That is almost the limiting case
of credulity, I would think.
So in order to save
the phenomenon,
I would propose
a different idea.
And I think it is
eminently reasonable.
And it is that as the complexity
of a system increases,
so too does the likelihood of
its generating a singularity,
or an unpredictable
perturbation.
So the pre-existent
state of the universe
I imagine to be extremely
simple, and unflawed
nothingness, in other words,
the least likely situation
in which you would expect
a singularity to emerge.
But now let's look at the other
end of the historical continuum
of the history of the universe.
Let's look at the
world we're living,
which is full of 106 elements,
tremendous gradients of energy,
ranging from what's going on
inside pulsars and quasars,
to what is going on
inside viruses and cells,
tremendous organizational
capacity at the atomic level,
at the molecular
level, at the level
of molecular
polymerization, at the level
of membranes and
gels, at the level
of cells and organelles,
organisms, societies,
and so forth, and so on.
In other words, the
universe, at this moment,
is a tremendously complicated,
integrated, multi-leveled,
dynamic thing.
And every passing moment,
it becomes more so.
This is what evolution,
history, compression
of time-- what all
of these things
are attempting to
indicate is the increasing
complexity of reality.
If a singularity is necessary
to explain this universe,
that singularity
must emerge rather
near the end of the
complexification process
rather than its beginning.
You see, we simply have to
reverse our preconceptions
about the flow of
cause and effect,
and then we get
a great attractor
that pulls all organization
and structure toward itself
over several billion years.
And as the objects
of its attraction
grow closer to its proximity,
they somehow interpenetrate.
They set up standing wave
patterns of interference.
New properties become
emergent, and the entire thing
complexifies.
Well, to my mind, this is
the divine imagination.
This is what Blake called it.
This is the only way
I can conceive of it.
Time is the theater
of God's becoming.
But it's also, from
the point of view
of a higher
dimensional manifold,
a kind of fait accompli.
And this is no contradiction.
Or if it is, it's all right.
Because in these realms
of higher ontology,
you're always asked to
avoid closure, and hold
the notion of a
coincidentia oppositorum,
a union of opposites.
The thing is both what it
is, and what it is not,
and yet it somehow
escapes contradiction.
And that's how the open
system is maintained.
That's how the miracle
of life is possible.
So I think of the
divine imagination
as the class of all things
both possible and beautiful.
It's a kind of
reverse Platonism.
The attractor is at the bottom
of a very deep pit into which
all phenomena is cascading.
What is taught in
modern universities
these days is that these tracks
in the snow are going nowhere.
The technical term is
"trendlessly fluctuating."
And we're told that history
is this kind of process.
It's trendlessly fluctuating.
It goes here.
It goes there.
It's called a "random walk"
in information theory.
It means you just wander around.
And well, it's very interesting.
Now we begin to see through the
marvel of the new mathematics
that random walks are not random
at all, that a sufficiently
long random walk becomes
a fractal structure
of extraordinary
depth and beauty.
So you see, really
what has to happen
is for us to see
chaos not as something
that degrades information, and
is somehow the enemy of order,
but rather chaos is the
birthplace of order.
Chaos is not the problem.
Chaos is the answer.
>>I think a factor
which changes everything
is the discovery of
dark matter, the fact
that 90% to 95%, 99% of
the matter in the universe
is utterly unknown to us.
This recent
discovery effectively
tells us that the whole cosmos,
and every material thing in it,
as a kind of unconscious,
a material unconscious,
an unknown dark realm,
which conditions
everything that happens--
the shapes of the galaxies,
their interactions.
Is Gaia, as it were,
awake on the side
that's in the sunlight, and in
the side that's in the darkness
as it rotates dreaming?
At night, are the plants, the
animals, the whole ecosystems,
the oceans, in some
sense, in the dream state,
when dreams and
spontaneous images of what
might be possible come to them?
So is there a kind
of Gaian dreaming?
And does it happen on the
nightside of the planet?
What would the Gaian
mind feel like?
What form would a
Gaian dream take?
Or what form would a Gaian
psychedelic experience take?
>>The psychedelic
experience, it's
preposterous to
attempt to analyze it
in terms of human motivation.
At its intense levels,
it seems rather
to be an ontological
reality of its own
that the human being
has simply been
privileged to briefly observe.
But it says no more.
Your deep psychedelic
experiences
say no more about
your personality
than that the
continent of Africa
is making a statement
about your personality.
They are, in fact,
independent objects.
To my mind, the
divine imagination,
or the imagination,
is the source
of all creativity in our dreams,
in our psychedelic experiences,
in the jungles, in the
currents of the ocean,
in the organization of
protozoan and microbial life.
Wherever there is large
scale integration rather than
simply raw physics, but
integration of laws of physics,
integration of properties, of
membranes and electrophoresis,
and this sort of thing, it
is the creative principle.
So do you think then that
in psychedelic experiences,
you're actually tapping into,
tuning into, or experiencing
something of the Gaian or
the cosmic imagination?
>>Absolutely.
And I think that psychedelic
experiences and dreams are only
different in degree, that they
are chemical cousins somehow.
And this is why I could see
human history as a Gaian dream.
Because I think, every night,
when you descend into dream,
you are potentially
open to receiving
Gaian corrective tuning
of your life state.
The whole thing is an
enzyme-driven process.
We are like an organ of Gaia.
We are the organ which
binds and releases energy.
I mean, a liver
cell doesn't need
to understand why it binds and
releases enzymes of the liver.
We bind and release energy
for reasons perhaps never
to be clear to us,
but which place us
firmly within the context
of the Gaian mind.
We have been chosen out--
and this is not something
to have great hubris about.
I mean, indoleacetic
acid has been chosen out
in plant metabolism
to play certain roles.
We have a role, but our role
seems to be a major one.
We are like a triggering system
out of the general background
of evolutionary processes
mediated by incoming radiation
to the surface of the Earth,
and then natural selection.
Suddenly, we come with
an epigenetic capability.
We write books, tell stories,
dance, sing, carve, paint.
These are not genetic processes.
These are epigenetic processes,
and they bind information,
and express the
Gaian mind very well.
As an example of
how willing I am
to entertain this
idea concretely,
I've been talking to a lot of
people about ecological crisis,
and the fate of the world,
and this sort of thing.
Well, imagine in
hindsight the wisdom
that we would impute to Gaia,
if we were to suddenly realize
that what is happening
on this planet
is that nature knows that
the sun is going to explode.
And what we are is a kind of
response to the anticipation
of a wounding.
50,000 million years ago, the
geo-heliocentric relationships
began to vibrate out of tune.
And as a consequence
of this, a species
was called forth that
could organize and escape.
And we are it.
In other words, we are in a
divine play in line with this.
And what made me even
entertain these ideas
is I had a very bizarre
experience recently.
I was in Hawaii, and in
our botanical garden,
there is a very large dead tree.
And one limb of this tree
sticks far out over the land.
And banisteriopsis caapi, a
large, hallucinogenic, South
American vine is planted
at the bottom of this tree.
And it just has
swarmed up this tree,
and covered it with greenery.
But it wouldn't go out onto
this one limb that stuck out.
And it bothered my
sense of symmetry
that this vine would not
completely cover this tree.
And I even thought about trying
to climb up into the tree,
and thread it out
onto this limb,
to get it to do what I wanted.
So I was sitting, looking at
this tree and this situation,
and actually thinking about it.
And suddenly, the limb fell.
It broke off.
And then I thought the vine
senses that it was unstable.
It would not invade this
domain that it sensed
was structurally unstable.
Well, then I said to
myself, but how could it?
What is the mechanism of
this sensing of instability?
And a friend of mine said
that perhaps the wind
impacts on weakened
wood differently
than on unrotted wood.
And perhaps rhythms in the tree
tell it to stay away from them.
And then I realized if one plant
has that kind of sensitivity
to the entering into
a domain of danger,
what must the ecosystem
of this planet
be doing in reaction to what
we are doing to the planet?
So the reason this
relates to the imagination
is because I see
ourselves in communication
with the imagination.
It is sending images
back into the past,
to try and direct us away
from areas of instability.
It really is.
The Gaian mind is a real mind.
Its messages are real messages.
And our task,
through discipline,
psychedelics,
attention to detail--
whatever we have going, is to
try and extract this message,
and eliminate ourselves
from the message,
so that we then can see
the face of the other.
>>And this is the
field of chaos.
For a certain setting
of the parameter,
form will emerge out
of the field of chaos.
And where this happens
reliably, we've
explored the ocean all over.
And we've found a
favorite regions.
And they're called the Apache
Rift, The Calico Mountain,
and the Scroll Reef.
So the submarine is dragging
along at a 1,000 iterations
depth in the ocean
of chaos, comes
across these regular patterns.
This is the first wing
of the Apache Valley.
>>This is Apache Valley.
>>I think so.
Then we've got another
field of chaos.
This is Calico Mountain.
See, these are just snapshots
of different starting positions,
if you like.
Later on, we drill a deep
hole in this area and all
the other interesting areas.
>>Why does it have this
quaternary structure.
>>That is the question.
This is Scroll Reef.
Now, it's a little presumptuous
to call this chaos theory,
because as a matter of
fact, there is no theory.
We're in the
exploration phase now.
And this is
experimental mathematics
that we are doing
with supercomputers.
This video was made
out of these simple
as possible dynamical systems
called the logistic equation.
And it just produces
a series-- it's very
similar to a dripping faucet.
So you could just
as well imagine
that we have 16,000 dripping
faucets in an array 128 by 128.
And the time between
drops is represented
as a color on the screen.
Now, do think that if you
had 16,000 dripping faucets,
you could get out of them a
pattern like Calico Mountain?
It relates to waterfalls, for
example, when the spray comes
off the waterfall.
And here's another example
of a chaotic system.
Could you write some
equations, and obtain
a computer program
that simulated
the spray from a waterfall?
I doubt it.
And from this
totally chaotic data,
viewed in this particular way,
which is called "chaoscophy."
You get this points
in the plains
that, if the data
was really random,
the dots would be
all over the plane.
Instead, they lie on a
curve, a smooth curve.
And that is called
the chaotic attractor.
Well, it happens.
I mean, there's a lot
of theory behind this,
enough to suggest that it's
not some kind artifact.
No matter what kind
of artifact it is,
it's an interesting artifact.
And I guess I'd like to call
this a mathematical law.
It has to do with the emergence
of form from a field of chaos.
We don't know what
else to call it.
It's not a mathematical law
that was known to Pythagoras.
And I don't know if
it was always there
since the beginning of time,
long before the Big Bang,
or if it just emerged into the
evolving field of the Gaian
mind through the fact that
computers make it visible.
I mean, I don't know.
But the theory can tell
you certain transformations
you'll expect, and others not.
For example, Terence had
pointed to the punctual aspect
of evolution, that many
transformations are saltatory.
They are catastrophic.
They are abrupt,
as, for example,
in the emergence of
form, as, for example,
in the neolithic
revolution, as, for example,
in the crystallization
of the planets.
>>As the temperature drops
in the developing universe,
according to standard
models, more and more form
comes into being.
First, you get atoms, then
stars and galaxies condense.
Then you get solar systems.
And through the cooling of
matter, you can get planets.
Planets are the cooled
remnants of exploding stars.
The elements in us
and in our planets
are stardust formed
from supernovae.
One way of looking at this is
to see the expansion and cooling
process, and, indeed, the flow
of events-- thinking of it
in terms of the flux of energy.
And one of the great
unifying concepts
of 19th century physics is a
unified conception of energy.
Now, it's not entirely
clear what energy is.
Energy, in some sense, is
the principle of change.
The more there is, the change
that can be brought about.
It's in a sense a
causative principle.
And it's a causative principle,
which exists in a process.
And this process, the energetic
influx of the universe,
underlies time,
change, becoming.
And the flux
process itself seems
to have an inherent
indeterminism to it.
This flux process,
the universal flux,
is organized into
forms by fields.
Matter is now thought of as
energy bound within fields,
the quantum matter fields,
and the fields of molecules,
and so on.
And think there are
many of these organizing
fields, the morphic fields.
And nature is the theater
of these habitual fields,
organizing the indeterminate
flux of energy.
Fields themselves, by having
this energy within them,
have this indeterminate
quality too.
So even organized systems of
a high level of complexity
still have this
probabilistic quality.
The fields that
organize this energy,
to give rise to material
and physical forms,
are themselves probabilistic.
Chaos is never eliminated.
There's always this
indeterminism or spontaneity
at all levels of organization.
So there's a formative
principle, which is the fields.
And there's an energetic
principle, which, I think,
has the chaos inherent in it.
It's a kind of change,
which, left as pure change,
would be chaos.
One way of thinking
of these is in terms
of the Indian notion
of Shakti as the energy
indeterminate
principle, and Shiva
as the formative
principle, working together
in a tantric union, to give
the world that we know.
>>All creation begins in
chaos, progresses in chaos,
and ends in chaos.
And in Hesiod, this
word "chaos" appears
in a piece called "Theogony,"
which is a theogony.
That is to say, more or
less, a creation tale.
They're the stories of
the creation of the gods
and goddesses, one by one.
Well, they're not gods
and goddesses, really.
They're abstract principles.
The three main ones are
Chaos, Gaia, and Eros.
And they're the most abstract
earliest protoconcepts
of Sky, Earth, and the
creative tension in between.
Now, the meaning of
chaos, the first time
the word appeared in literature,
has got nothing whatsoever,
apparently, superficially,
to do with what
we mean by chaos in the English
language, and in ordinary life.
It meant only, to
Hesiod, according
to the lexicon, the gaping
void between Heaven and Earth,
out of which the creation came.
So creation of chaos,
yes, but the chaos
did not mean disorder
or anything negative.
It only meant this gaping void.
Well, after understanding
that, you look up.
You think of these
different interpretations
of sky god concept, and the
gap, and the opening, and so on.
When you look at the
sky, the most obvious
chief characteristic feature
of the sky is the Milky Way.
And it does appear as a kind
of gap between this and that.
The royal road of
the gods traveling
between the underworld
and the overworld.
Understanding that, you
can then connect the word
with an earlier word
concept, or god or goddess,
meaning the same thing
as what you visually see
represented in the
Milky Way itself.
And that is in one of its
most popular representations--
Tiamat, the goddess of
chaos from Enuma Elish,
the creation poem,
the greatest epic poem
of Babylonian
literature, discovered
in the Library of
Ashurbanipal at Nineveh--
a recent discovery.
There was this story of
the origin of the gods
and the creation of the
world by Tiamat and Apsu,
the god and goddess
of chaos, who
lived in the water-- one more
sweet water, and the other salt
water.
And they created then the whole
pantheon, and the whole world,
and so on.
But eventually,
along came Marduk.
Marduk was a younger
generation of gods,
and the next generation.
And there was a conflict between
the older and the younger
gods over how the
world ought to be run.
And apparently, this
conflict was taking place
in the form of a
social transformation,
a transformation represented
in the mythological
by the demotion
of Apsu and Tiamat
from the pantheon of
Babylon, the city Babylon,
and the replacement by Marduk.
Marduk eventually became the
god, the Mr Big of Babylon
around 2,000 BC, coinciding
with the sweep of patriarchy
over that city, propelled
on a new type of war chariot
with spoked wheels
instead of solid wheels.
Am I digressing too much?
>>No, you've reached the wheel.
>>Well, I've reached
the spoke wheel,
and its association
with-- is this accidental?
I don't know-- with the
patriarchy, and the fact
that the wheel itself,
as a mathematical model,
is the paradigm of order,
a divine mathematical form,
according to Plato, as
the planets were supposed
to move before Kepler introduced
the ellipse-- fantastic
transformation, punctual
catastrophe in the history
of consciousness.
In short, according to
this epic, Enuma Elish,
Tiamat was killed in
the most violent way--
ripped to pieces, creating
the world, creating
a new order by our hero
of Babylon, Mr Marduk,
but also Baal, and so on.
His new year celebration was
honored at the new year time
all over Old Europe,
including at Stonehenge.
At the New Year's festival,
this epic poem was read.
So annually there was the
reminder that chaos is bad.
Chaos has been killed.
Chaos has been
replaced by order,
and order associated with
perfect, periodic, the wheel,
the cycle, the perfect
roundness, and so on.
Whereas in Minoan
Crete, you find,
according to the evidence
of the excavators
and all who have examined
the artworks that remain,
a long lasting fluorescence
of partnerships
culture with no
domination by a male god.
It's established that there
is the diffusion from Crete
to Greece.
And the last remainder
of Cretan culture,
which is a very
interesting one, must
have been the last vestige
of the Garden of Eden.
We're talking about tremendous
happiness and fluorescence
of beauty in all
aspects of life.
The importance of
the Chaos Revolution
now is that chaos has
recovered from being demoted,
from being banished to the
unconscious around 2,000 BC
or so, from then up
to now 4,000 or maybe
5,000 years of the
repression of chaos.
I mean, chaos is to this day,
in our culture, a bad word.
We have to watch out for chaos.
It ruins your love life.
It has to be replaced by order.
Scientists, most especially,
hate it, and so on.
The fact that scientists
of all people,
in the temple of
science, that Tiamat
has to be accepted as a friend
and replaced upon her throne,
this is big news.
>>I believe that the
importance of the psychedelics
is primary here, and
that it doesn't simply
have to do with the fact that
they synergize cognition--
which they do do--
and the synthetics, as
well the natural ones.
But it's deeper than that.
It's that we have
a secret history.
Knowledge of which
has been lost to us,
and only is now
recoverable in the light
of the kind of mindset that
becomes possible to us,
if we accept the new paradigm.
And what the secret history
is, and has to do with,
and how it relates
to the Gaian mind,
and the world soul
is that we are
the victims of an instance
of traumatic abuse
in childhood, as a species.
Because a symbiotic
relationship with
world-girdling intelligence
of the planet, which
was mediated through plants,
through shamanism-- I mean,
it wasn't an abstraction.
It was an experience--
was eventually
broken up, and disrupted by
progressive, climatic drying
of the Eurasian and
African landmass.
And so this is, literally,
the fall into history,
the expulsion from Eden.
All these primary myths of
a golden age found and lost
have to do with
the fact that once
we lived in dynamic balance
with nature, not as animals do,
but as human beings
only could, but in a way
that we have now lost.
Well, how have we lost it?
And what have we lost?
How we have lost it
is the way in which
these psychoactive compounds
that were being brought
into the diet were
acting is they
were psycholytic upon
the formation of the ego.
They literally suppressed
the formation of the ego,
and promoted, instead,
collectivist tribal partnership
values, which were
operating intuitionally
in a resonance relationship
with the feminine vegetable
matrix of the planet.
In other words,
nothing was verbalized.
Everything was felt.
Everything was intuited.
And regularly, at the
new and full moon,
these small groups
of hunter-gatherers,
later pastoralists,
gathered and took
these hallucinogenic plants,
and dissolved boundaries,
and engaged in group sex,
and annealed-- a new word
that we've brought
in here-- annealed
the irregularities
that had cropped up
in people's personal
self-imaging
in the interval since
the last session.
And this kept everything
grounded on the plane
of that which is important.
I.E. The values of the
group, of the species,
of dynamic balance
with the ecosystem,
and so forth, and so on.
Well, when this was
disrupted, and the supplies
of these plants were diminished,
and new religious forms arose,
and the time between
the great festivals
grew longer and longer, the
ego begins to take hold, first,
as a kind of cancerous
aberration, but then quickly
becoming a new style of
behavior, which quickly then
eliminates all other
styles of behavior
by suppressing
access to the chaos.
And this is the
point I want to make,
that there is between the
ego and full understanding
of reality, a barrier, a
problem-- the fear of the ego
to surrender to
the fact of chaos.
Chaos is what we
have lost touch with.
This is why it has
been given a bad name.
Because it is feared by
the dominant archetype
of our world, which is
the ego, which clenches.
Because its existence is
defined in terms of control.
And the furious modeling
process-- and this
will now sound like a knock on
modeling-- the furious modeling
process that the ego
endlessly carries out
is an effort to fight
the absence of closure.
The ego wants closure.
It wants a complete explanation.
The beginning of
wisdom, I believe,
is the ability to accept
an inherent messiness
in your explanation
of what's going on.
Because nowhere is it
writ that human minds
should be able to give a
full accounting of creation
in all dimensions
and on all levels.
You know, Wittgenstein
had this idea
that philosophy should be
what he called "true enough."
And I think that's a great idea.
Let's just make it true enough.
Because that's as true
as it can be gotten.
Well, the imagination is chaos.
New forms are fetched
out of this chaos.
For me, the creative act is
the letting down of the net
of human imagination into the
ocean of chaos on which we are
suspended, and the attempt
to bring out of it ideas,
to bring out of it-- sometimes--
This is my model for the
psychedelic experience,
that it is the
night sea journey,
that it is the lone fisherman
on a tropical sea with his nets.
And you let these nets
down, and sometimes,
something tears through them
that leaves them in shreds.
And you just row for shore, and
put your head under your bed,
and pray.
And at other times,
what slips through are
the minutiae, the minnows of
this ichthyological metaphor
of idea chasing.
But sometimes, you actually
can bring home something that
is food, that is food for
the human community, that we
can sustain ourselves
on, and go forward.
So we haven't talked that
much about art and aesthetics,
but I think, in the human
world, the appetition
is for beauty, to my mind.
And this is another place where
the Platonism shines radiantly
through.
Because Plato held that
the good was the true,
and that both were
the beautiful.
And this is a very quaint
idea from the point of view
of modern philosophy,
but I think
it's in the bones, when you
actually connect yourself up
to the planet.
That's why chaos is capable of
being the tremendous repository
ordered beauty that it is.
Because there is no chaos,
in the old definition, which
is to say that which by
any definition or any test
is found to be disordered.
That is just a kind
of hell notion,
a kind of hypostasization of
an ultimate state of disorder.
But nowhere in the world that is
deployed through space and time
do you encounter that.
Instead, what you
encounter is embedded order
upon embedded order,
this fractal thing.
And then finally, for
me, the imagination
is the goal of history.
I see culture as an effort
to literally realize
our collective dreams.
And it's on a very crude level,
when it's you make your mask,
and I make my mask, and then
we dance around together.
And it's even at a
very crude level, when
it's you design
your shopping mall,
and I'll design my
World Trade Center,
and we'll put them on the
same piece of real estate.
But we're coming
now through media,
I believe, through virtual
reality, and human machine
integration, and this
kind of the thing,
into a situation
where the imagination
is going to be something
that we can share,
that the path of mind
through its own meanderings
will become something that can
be recorded, and played back.
We will have the possibility
of living in our own past,
or creating and trading
realities as art.
And art as life lived
in the imagination
is the great archetype,
which rears itself up
at the end of history--
life in the imagination.
The imagination is
this auric field,
which surrounds the
transcendental object
at greater and greater
depth as you approach
the transcendental object.
And as we now close
distance with it,
all of our cultural expression,
all of our self-awareness
is taking on this
curiously designed quality.
I mean, you must
have noticed this,
that the world is very
heavily designed in a way
that it never was before.
Morpho-genetic fields
of great size and scope,
which are international schools
of architecture and design,
touch whole continents.
Entire cities are given
certain ambiences.
This is the summoning
of the imagination
into the human scale.
It's like a god that we wish to
call down, and draw to Earth.
I mean, this is why
William Blake called
it the divine imagination.
Because it is the
four-gated city.
It is the flying saucer.
We are on a journey to
meet this great attractor,
and as we close
distance with it,
it is more and more
a multifaceted mirror
of our images of beauty.
So it's like an
ascending learning
curve that becomes asymptotic.
And at that point,
you're face to face
with a mystery, a
living mystery that
is within each and all of us.
It's the imagination that
argues for the divine spark
in human beings.
It's absolutely
confounding, if you
try to get biology
to produce it for you
as a necessary quantity.
It isn't that.
It's an emanation from above.
It is literally a descent of
the world soul into all of us.
We then become the
atoms of the world soul,
and our channel to it
is by closing our eyes,
and obliterating our immediate
personalized space-time locus,
and falling into the
imagination, which
is running like a river
through all of us endlessly,
driven by the hydraulic moment
of the cataracts of chaos,
which usher into the
creativity of the imagination.
I mean, these river
metaphors are just endlessly
applicable to this-- the flowing
of forces over landscapes,
the pressure of chaos
on the imagination
to create creativity.
And it's looping
back into the same.
And these things are the icons
for the world that wants to be.
But the key is surrender
dissolution of boundaries,
dissolution of the
ego, and a trust
in the love of the
goddess, which transcends
rational understanding.
There will come a
moment, which will
be an absolute leap into space.
And we will simply have to
have the faith that there
is something waiting there,
because the dominator style has
left us no choice.